Pm sample data (#55)
firstdraft/appdev-chapters: sample_data.md

To start, open this project and start to create data.  First, create a user, then go to the photos page and create a new photo.  Then create a comment on that photo.  Maybe add yourself as a fan.  Then go back and make a few more photos.  Perfect, now log out and make another user and do the same process again.  This process sure is time-consuming.  What happens if some corrupt data got into your database, and now you need to delete all the records... 

Luckily for you, we have provided sample data in all of the projects because a project without data is pretty boring and can be hard to debug.  Now, how did we do that without going in and making the records one at a time? What we do is create a sample data task to populate the database and are going to show you how to do the same.

## Where do we write our sample data? 

In class, whenever we have needed to get data into our database, we were able to run the command `rails sample_data`, but where is that file located? 

> If you were to open a class project and do a search, you would find that our `sample_data` lives in the `tasks` folder, which is located within the `lib` folder. The path to that would be `lib/tasks/dev.rake`. When we first started learning, whenever we want to run a Ruby file, we would have to call `ruby filename.rb`, so we might think that we would need to run `ruby dev.rake` to run this file. While this would follow our previous convention, we are able to define how we call these tasks in a rake file. Let's start building the task by being able to call it in the rails terminal.

Author: I was trying to prevent the question of why we are calling `rails sample_date` rather than `dev.rake` in the terminal.  I think this can be taken out.

### The start 
```
desc "Fill the database tables with some sample data"
task({ :sample_data => :environment}) do
  p "Hello, World!"
end

> ```

Author: This was my intent, I just forgot to update the link to the project with a blank `dev.rake` file

If everything is correct, when we run `rails sample_data` in the terminal, the line "Hello, World!" should have appeared in the terminal. So what does this code do so far?

#### `desc "Fill the database tables with some sample data"`

The [`desc`](https://apidock.com/ruby/v1_9_3_125/Rake/DSL/desc) stands for description, and that is what we are doing with this line, we are describing what we are going to do within this task. 

#### `task({ :sample_data => :environment}) do`

> Here we are naming our task and making it available in our coding environment.  By defining our task `sample_data`, it is ready for us to call with `rails sample_data`. As long as we finish our `do` with an `end`, we have our task. It isn't much yet, but we are starting to connect the dots. 

Author: My intent was to talk about the `:environment` value, I didn't word it correctly.  I think we should talk about it because without they can't seed their project

    photo.save
  end
```

Congratulations, with the code you just added, you have fully seeded your database.  Now, what if we want some data that is a little bit more interesting. 

# Adding interesting data with Faker

Now, instead of having to come up with all of these data, let's use the [`faker gem`](https://github.com/faker-ruby/faker). What this will do for us is let us pick from a bunch of data sets to sample. To use this in our project, we would install it like any other gem. 

First, add this to our gem file. 
```
gem 'faker', :git => 'https://github.com/faker-ruby/faker.git', :branch => 'master'
```
Then we need to run our `bundle install`

Now in our `sample_data` file, we will have to put `require faker` at the top of our seeds file within the task
```
require 'faker'
```
After this, we have all the power to update our `sample_data` file once again. Let's look at what our file might look like after adding the `faker gem`. 

```
25.times do 
    user = User.new
    user.username = Faker::Name.first_name 
    user.private = Faker::Boolean.boolean
    user.password = "password"
    user.comments_count = 0
    user.likes_count = 0
    user.save
end
```

> Now each of our records will have a name sampled from the faker database of names.  We can do this with all of our columns. 

Reviewer: I think "dataset" is the more accurate word to use here instead of "database". You also use "datasets" later on.

With Faker, we have access to all types of datasets. I highly recommend taking a look to see all of the [different generators](https://github.com/faker-ruby/faker#generators). 

> 

Reviewer: Are _all_ of these new lines intentional?

#### `task({ :sample_data => :environment}) do`

Here we are naming our calling the `task` method and giving it a hash as the argument. The hash will use the name of our task as the key and use `:environment` as the value.  Using `:environment` as the value will make the Rails environment load in our task giving us access to all models, gems, and initializers. After we finish our `do` with an `end`, our task is ready to call by inputting `rails sample_data` in a terminal.  It isn't much yet, but we are starting to connect the dots. 

### Remove old data

Now that we can access our task, the first thing we should do is clear out any old data.  Based on our project schema, I know that we have the tables for `Comments`, `Follow_requests`, `Likes`, `Photos`, and `Users`.  

I will add the following lines to our `sample_data` task. 

```
desc "Fill the database tables with some sample data"
task({ :sample_data => :environment}) do

 User.destroy_all
 FollowRequest.destroy_all
 Like.destroy_all
 Photo.destroy_all
 User.destroy_all

end
```

> The `.destroy_all` method calls each record and destroys each record and each record associated with it.  Now that we have a clean database, we can start adding records to our database.

Reviewer: I've noticed you have two spaces sometimes instead of one. Is there a particular reason for that?

```suggestion
The `.destroy_all` method calls each record and destroys each record and each record associated with it. Now that we have a clean database, we can start adding records to our database.
```

 **Sidenote - `.destroy_all` is a very permanent method and shouldn't be used with production data that belongs to your users**,   

### Adding Users

> When we start to add data to our task, we will need to know what column is available for each table.  In the `user.rb` file, we can see the `users` table schema. It looks like this. 

Reviewer: This is another place with two spaces

```suggestion
When we start to add data to our task, we will need to know what column is available for each table. In the `user.rb` file, we can see the `users` table schema. It looks like this. 
```

#### `desc "Fill the database tables with some sample data"`

The [`desc`](https://apidock.com/ruby/v1_9_3_125/Rake/DSL/desc) stands for description, and that is what we are doing with this line, we are describing what we are going to do within this task. 

#### `task({ :sample_data => :environment}) do ... end`

Here we are naming our calling the `task` method and giving it a hash as the argument. The key in the Hash is the name of our Task (as a Symbol) and the value should be `:environment`. Using `:environment` as the value will make the Rails environment load in our task giving us access to all models, gems, and initializers. After we finish our `do` with an `end`, our task is ready to call by inputting `rails sample_data` in a terminal. It isn't much yet, but we are starting to connect the dots. 

### Adding Users

When we start to add data to our task, we will need to know what column is available for each table. In the `user.rb` file, we can see the `User` table schema. It looks like this. 

```
# == Schema Information
#
# Table name: users
#
#  id              :integer          not null, primary key
#  comments_count  :integer
#  likes_count     :integer

> #  password_digest :string

Reviewer: @pmckernin you still have `password_digest` here, even though you've removed it other places.

First, add this to our gem file. 
```
gem 'faker', :git => 'https://github.com/faker-ruby/faker.git', :branch => 'master'
```
To install the gem we need to run `bundle install` in a Terminal.

Now in our `sample_data` task, we will have to put `require "faker"` at the top of our seeds file within the task
```
require 'faker'
```
After this, we have all the power to update our `sample_data` file once again. Let's look at what our file might look like after adding the `faker` gem. 

```
25.times do 
  user = User.new
  user.username = Faker::Name.first_name 
  user.private = Faker::Boolean.boolean
  user.password = "password"
  user.comments_count = 0
  user.likes_count = 0
  user.save
end
```
Now each of our records will have a name sampled from the faker dataset of names. We can do this with all of our columns. 

With Faker, we have access to all types of datasets. I highly recommend taking a look to see all of the [different generators](https://github.com/faker-ruby/faker#generators). 

> Looking at the faker documentation, we can scroll down to the Generators section.In this section, we can select one of the links. For our seeds file, we selected `Faker::Name`. Inside this link, you can see all of the different methods we can call on `Faker::Name` to return something different. Try some of them in your application!

Reviewer: You mention scrolling down to the generators section, but the previous link already starts there.

```suggestion
Looking at the faker documentation, we can scroll down to the Generators section. In this section, we can select one of the links. In our sample_data task, we selected `Faker::Name`. Inside this link, you can see all of the different methods we can call on `Faker::Name` to return something different. Try some of them in your application!
```

> Inside this link,

What link?

### Remove old data

Now that we can create all of this data, how do we keep our datasets clean? What if we change our seeds file and want to add more records? What happens to the old data, does it just stay? How do we remove this stale data?

Luckily for us, we can add the following lines to the beginning of our `sample_data` task. 

```
desc "Fill the database tables with some sample data"
task({ :sample_data => :environment}) do

 User.destroy_all
 FollowRequest.destroy_all
 Like.destroy_all
 Photo.destroy_all
 User.destroy_all

> 

Reviewer: maybe add a `...` as an attempt to make it visually clear that the other code in the task still happens _after_ all the destroy all stuff.

end
```

The `.destroy_all` method calls each record and destroys each record and each record associated with it. This will allow us to start with good data everytime we run the `sample_data` task. 

>  **Sidenote - `.destroy_all` is a very permanent method and shouldn't be used with production data that belongs to your users**,

Reviewer: I think this is phrased like a footnote. Perhaps, it would be better to format it as such? What do you think?

### Adding the remainder of the data

We can handle the rest of the data in our task similarly to the `FollowRequest` above. It will result in the following code. 

```
photos = ["https://tinyurl.comy6hk6oep", https://tinyurl.com/y5uszprj, https://picsum.photos/200]
10.times do 
  photo = Photo.new
  photo.caption = "This is my photo"
  photo.image = photos.sample
  photo.likes_count = 0
  photo.owner_id = users.sample.id
  photo.save
end

p "Added #{Photo.count} Photos"

photos = Photo.all 

10.times do 
  like = Like.new
  like.fan_id = users.sample.id 
  like.photo_id = photos.sample.id
  like.save
end

p "Added #{Like.count} Likes"

comments = ["Cool", "I like it", "Love it"]
  
10.times do 
  comment = Comment.new
  comment.body = comments.sample
  comment.author_id = users.sample.id 
  comment.photo_id = photos.sample.id 
  comment.save
end

p "Added #{Comment.count} Comments"
```

> Congratulations, with the code you just added, you have fully created your database! The problem is that we only have three usernames. What if we want 50 usernames or 100? Do you think you could create an array with all of those usernames? Is there an easier way to get usernames? 

Reviewer: > you have fully created your database

This is misleading, since rake tasks don't create the database, this one just adds records to all of the tables. I think something like

```suggestion
Congratulations, with the code you just added, you can run `rails sample_data` to add records into each of your database tables! The problem is that we only have three usernames. What if we want 50 usernames or 100? Do you think you could create an array with all of those usernames? Is there an easier way to get usernames? 
```

What do you think?

```

user = User.new
user.username = "Pat"
user.private = true
user.comments_count = 0
user.likes_count = 0
user.save

```
If we run `rails sample_data` we have just created our first user. Now we can copy and paste that code as many times as we need to create more users. Or we can use a loop.
```

3.times do
  user = User.new
  user.username = "Pat"
  user.private = true
  user.comments_count = 0
  user.likes_count = 0
  users.save
end
```

Wow, we just created three users in no time! It might not be the world's most _interesting_ data, since each user has the same username and is private, but it's a start. 

When we create this data, it might be pretty challenging to determine which `User` belongs to any other record if they all show up with the same `username`. How can we create our code so that each `User` record could have a different `username`?

What if we did this? 

```
names = ["Pat", "Raghu", "Jelani"]
bool = [true, false]

 3.times do |count|
    user = User.new
    user.username = names.at(count)
    user.private = bool.sample
    user.comments_count = 0
    user.likes_count = 0
    user.save
 end
```

> Now we are getting somewhere! By using `names.at(count)` within our [loop](https://chapters.firstdraft.com/chapters/764), we will be able to access a different name from our `names` array and assign it to our `username` column.  For the user's `private` column, we can call the `.sample` on our `bool` array; This will set a user's `private` column to either `true` or `false`.

Reviewer: Nice addition!

Reviewer: Oh, there's an extra space.
```suggestion
Now we are getting somewhere! By using `names.at(count)` within our [loop](https://chapters.firstdraft.com/chapters/764), we will be able to access a different name from our `names` array and assign it to our `username` column. For the user's `private` column, we can call the `.sample` on our `bool` array; This will set a user's `private` column to either `true` or `false`.
```

#### An aside: Passwords

> What happens if you need to add a password? If you were to run the firstdraft draft generators the generator would add the column of `password_digest` to the schema.  Once this is added you would think you would want to add call `.password`[^1] column to the `user`. The code will look like this.

Reviewer: This is only true if they use the `draft:account` generator, not just any generator.

# == Schema Information
#
# Table name: follow_requests
#
#  id           :integer          not null, primary key
#  status       :string
#  created_at   :datetime         not null
#  updated_at   :datetime         not null
#  recipient_id :integer
#  sender_id    :integer
#
```

It appears that a `FollowRequest` has a column of `sender_id` and `recipient_id`.  So how are we going to get a `User` record from our database and get the `id` number from that record for our new `FollowRequest`? 

One way to do it is to create a variable that contains all the `User` records.

```
users = User.all
```

By creating the variable of `users`, we can call the `.sample` method to retrieve one random `User` record. Once we have that record, we can then call the `.id` method to extract the id number from that `User`.  This user's id number can then be assigned to the `sender_id` and `recipient_id` column for our new `FollowRequest` record. See the code below for an example.

```
users = User.all

10.times do 
  fr = FollowRequest.new
  fr.status = bool.sample
  fr.sender_id = users.sample.id 
  fr.recipient_id = users.sample.id 
  fr.save
end

p "Added #{FollowRequest.count} FollowRequests"
```

> This loop above will create 10 `FollowRequests` where the sender and receiver are random existing users. 

Reviewer: It might read better as either
> This loop will create 10...

or

> The loop above will create 10

#### `task({ :sample_data => :environment}) do ... end`

The task method, requires a Hash argument. The key in the Hash is the name (as a Symbol). The value in the Hash should be  `:environment`. Using `:environment` as the value will make the Rails environment load in our task giving us access to all models, gems, and initializers. After we finish our `do` with an `end`, our task is ready to call by inputting `rails sample_data` in a terminal. It isn't much yet, but we are starting to connect the dots. 

### Adding Users

When we start to add data to our `sample_data` task, we will need to know what columns are available for each table. In the `user.rb` file, we can see the `User` table schema. It looks like this. 

```
# == Schema Information
#
# Table name: users
#
#  id              :integer          not null, primary key
#  comments_count  :integer
#  likes_count     :integer
#  private         :boolean
#  username        :string
#  created_at      :datetime         not null
#  updated_at      :datetime         not null
#

> 

Reviewer: Is this extra space?

```

By calling the column names on a new instance of the `User` table, we can now assign values to the columns of our new `User` record. 

```

user = User.new
user.username = "Pat"
user.private = true
user.comments_count = 0
user.likes_count = 0
user.save

> 

Reviewer: Is this an extra space?

# Creating Sample Data 

> You have just created your application and are figuring out where to start. A good practice is to create some sample data early on in the life of your application so you will always have a single command to reset your database with good data. Together we are going to build a `sample_data` task using the [Photogram-signin](https://github.com/appdev-projects/photogram-signin-fall20/tree/no-rake) project. I recommend opening this project in Gitpod and following along.

Reviewer: I think maybe this first part should have a sub-heading, since the rest of the chapter has them. Perhaps something like "Motivation"? What do you think?

> After the repo has opened in Gitpod start to create some data. There are a few ways we can do this. We can run `bin/server` and start to put in data through the forms. We can also go to visit `/rails/db` within our running application and create some records. Lastly, we can visit a rails console by typing `rails console` into a terminal and start to enter some records.  If you are in a rails console, here is the code to create your first `User` record.

Reviewer: > We can also go to visit `/rails/db` within our running application

@pmckernin I think this should be either, "we can also go to `/rails/db`" or "we can also visit `/rails/db`"

I think "visit" should be reserved for going to routes and URLs. For `rails console`, we usually use verbs like `"opening", or "entering".

```
u = User.new
u.username = "Norman"
u.save
```

That is a bit of typing, so maybe we should go to the running application and fill out the forms. Let's sign up a new user, then go to `/photos` and create a new photo. We can then click on the details of a photo, and create a comment, make sure to add the correct `author_id`. Then go back `/photos` and make a few more `Photo` records, adding comments each time. 

> This process sure is time-consuming, and what happens if some corrupt data got into your database, and now you need to delete all the records... 

Reviewer: @pmckernin I think this could be improved by breaking it up into multiple sentences.

```suggestion
This process sure is time-consuming! What if some invalid data gets into your database and breaks your app? Now you need to delete all the records and start making records one at a time again...  
```

Luckily for you, we have provided sample data in all of the projects because a project without data is pretty boring and can be hard to debug. Now, how did we do that without going in and making the records one at a time? What we did was create a `sample_data` task to populate the database, and we are going to show you how to create your own!

> ## Where do we write our sample data? 

Reviewer: Looking at this again, do you think this is a little ambiguous? "write sample data" could mean creating records in _any_ way (rails console, /rails/db, or in CRUD form). It's not super clear, if someone is just looking through the sub-headings, that this is referring to a rake task. Do you think something like

```suggestion
## Where do we write our sample data task? 
```

would be an improvement?

In class, whenever we have needed to get data into our database, we were able to run the command `rails sample_data`, but where is that command is defined? 

If you were to open a class project and search through all the files, you would find that our `sample_data` lives in the `tasks` folder, which is located within the `lib` folder. The path to that would be `lib/tasks/dev.rake`. But, what is a task?

A "task" is just a small program that does useful things in our application like backing up the database, generating reports, or sending out email notices to your users. With everything in Rails, there is a designated location for the files that define the tasks for our application, `lib/tasks/`.

> Now that we have found where our `sample_data` task should live, let's start building a task that can be called in the terminal. 

Reviewer: Since this section is supposed to tell/teach them, "know" feels like a better word than "find". What do you think?

```suggestion
Now that we know where our `sample_data` task should live, let's start building a task that can be called in the terminal. 
```

#### `task({ :sample_data => :environment}) do ... end`

> Here we are naming our calling the `task` method and giving it a hash as the argument. The key in the Hash is the name of our task (as a Symbol) and the value should be `:environment`. Using `:environment` as the value will make the Rails environment load in our task giving us access to all models, gems, and initializers. After we finish our `do` with an `end`, our task is ready to call by inputting `rails sample_data` in a terminal. It isn't much yet, but we are starting to connect the dots. 

Reviewer: > Here we are naming our calling the `task` method and giving it a hash as the argument

I think there are some typos here. You might consider rewording the sentence to something like:

> The task method, requires a Hash argument. The key in the hash is the name (as a Symbol). The value in the Hash should be `:environment`...
